---
layout: post
title:  "Stashing changes with Git"
description:   "Git's stack container for temporary changes"
teaser: "Move changes between different branches"
categories: development
tags:
    - git
---

When working on projects, sometimes, I found myself making changes in the wrong branch. Fortunately I discovered
another amazing command in Git: `git stash`.<!--more-->

This command save all local changes to a stack-like container and reset the current branch to HEAD. A more verbose use
would be `git stash push -m "message"`, in this way it's possible to add a message describing what the stash is about.

To see what has been stashed so far the command `git stash list` will list all the entry.

When I need to move changes to another branch I usually stash the changes, move to the target branch and then
`git stash apply` to complete the job. Once applied, the stashed change are still stored, to remove the latest entry in
stack I use `git stash drop` (`git stash pop` for automatically applying and removing a stash). To remove all stashed
entry just use `git stash clear`.

The command `git stash apply` will apply the latest stashed modifications. To apply a specific stash, let's say the
third stash, run `git stash apply stash@{2}` (stashes are store in a stack, with indices starting from 0 with the older stash having index 0).

Another useful trick that can be performed using this feature is checking the differences between the local files and
the stashed changes, to do that use `git stash show` (again it's possible to select which stash enquire).
